Hi, I am Delio Vicini and in the following I will present our paper on
“A Non-Exponential Transmittance Model for Volumetric Scene
Representations”. I am a 4th year PhD student at EPFL and worked on
this project with Facebook Reality Labs.
This is joint work with Wenzel Jakob from EPFL and Anton Kaplanyan
from Facebook Reality Labs.
In computer graphics, we are continuously increasing the complexity of
scenes that we are trying to store and render.
However, while assets increase in complexity, frequently we run into
situations where a complex asset is only visible on a small number of
pixels. Loading and rendering the full asset in such a situation can
be wasteful, in particular if we are considering devices with limited
computational resources, such as standalone VR headsets.
Fundamentally, we observe a mismatch between scene complexity and the
desired render resolution.
Level of detail methods try to mitigate this issue by converting the
scene or individual objects into a representation at the desired
quality level. One way to reduce the scene complexity would be to
simply decimate the geometry.
However, this often does not preserve appearance and works poorly in
particular on aggregate geometry, such as the trees in the
foreground. An alternative approach is to try to convert the scene
into a voxelized volumetric representation.
There are several advantages to using a volumetric scene
representation. A voxelized representation can naturally be scaled to
the right resolution. We can pick the resolution of the voxel grid
depending on the size of the asset in the rendered image.
Additionally, the set of voxels which are not empty is typically
sparse, so the memory consumption of the volumetric representation
scales favorably. The terms “voxelized” or “volumetric”
representation are quite generic, so I would like to make it a bit
more clear what I mean by such representation.
When rendering surfaces, we typically sample light paths by starting
from the camera and tracing through the scene until we hit a light
source. The scene’s geometry is usually represented by triangle
meshes. Our goal is now to replace this process by volume rendering,
where we sample paths in a participating medium approximating the
scene. The parameters of the participating medium can for example be
stored on a grid. What’s interesting here, is that the theory of
participating media has been derived to render phenomena such as
smoke or clouds.
The question is now whether can we represent an arbitrary scene as a
participating medium?
That scene might contain hard surfaces, such as for example the
Stanford bunny. At first representing arbitrary scenes as
participating media might seem a bit of a stretch.
However, we can see that this makes sense by considering the
appearance of objects as they are further and further away from the
camera. These trees are completely solid objects with triangles
representing leaves and branches.
However, as we decrease the render resolution, we see that more and
more regions appear semitransparent, or “volume-like”.
So far, I’ve mentioned level of detail as a motivation to investigate
volumetric scene representations.
But this is not the only application of such representations.
We have recently seen volumetric scene representations become more and
more popular for image-based scene reconstruction.
Given a set of reference images, we would like to reconstruct a
volumetric representation of a real scene.
Volume rendering is naturally a differentiable operation.
Theref ore, we can use gradient descent to optimize the volumetric
scene representation to match the observed images.
Obviously, our paper is not the first to use a volumetric
representation for either level of detail or inverse rendering.
There has been a large amount of prior work on both these
applications of volumetric scene representations.
Several papers have proposed volumetric representations for level of
detail applications.
They proposed different ways to work around the limitations of
conventional volume rendering models to better approximate scenes
containing surfaces.
For image-based reconstruction, we have recently seen the use of
emissive volumes in combination with neural networks.
Additionally, volumetric representations have also been optimized
considering a direct illumination model, or even full global
illumination using the Mitsuba 2 renderer.
Fundamentally, in volume rendering, there are two main functions which
determine the appearance of a volume.
The first one is the phase function.
Similar to a BSDF for surface rendering, the phase function describes
the angular distribution of scattering in a volume.
The second one is the transmittance.
The transmittance function tells us how much radiance can reach one
point from the other in the medium.
In our work, we build on the observation that conventional
transmittance models are insufficient when we try to approximate
arbitrary scenes as volumes.
Therefore, we introduce a new transmittance model that is better
suited to represent arbitrary scenes as a volume.
In this paper we focus on the transmittance but improving the
representation power of the phase function would be an interesting
avenue for future work.
More precisely, we show that scene representation benefits from a
non-exponential transmittance formulation.
We show how to efficiently compute gradients through this new model
to allow optimization of its parameters.
We then show applications of our model to appearance prefiltering for
level of detail, scene reconstruction using differentiable rendering
and neural radiance fields.
We found that having an improved volumetric scene representation can
benefit all these applications.
In the following, I will talk about the model itself and the
applications. For the details on the gradient computation, please see
the paper. Let’s now have a closer look at how transmittance is
usually defined. The standard assumption we make in participating
media is that at a microscopic level they consist of uncorrelated
particles. If we explicitly trace rays in a collection of
uncorrelated particles, we can numerically estimate the resulting
transmittance. The transmittance can be computed as the probability
of exceeding a certain distance.
For the case of uncorrelated particles, we obtain an exponential
transmittance function. This is not surprising and is what we usually
use for volume rendering.
The assumption of the medium consisting of uncorrelated particles does
not always hold. Suppose we replace the uncorrelated particles by a
part of a surface we get an entirely different transmittance falloff.
In this case, the transmittance will be linear, which is quite
different from exponential.
In particular, the transmittance will reach exactly zero.
This is already an indication, that using the standard exponential
transmittance model might not be such a good fit to represent scenes
containing hard surfaces.
We can do similar numerical experiments on a real scene.
Here, we trace a beam of rays and evaluate the transmittance
numerically. This beam primarily intersects the foliage of the trees
in the foreground. The dashed line here is an analytic exponential
transmittance model. It closely matches the behavior observed
numerically. This is expected since the tree leaves are not that
different from uncorrelated particles.
For a beam intersecting with the roof of the building, we get linear
transmittance as expected.
Finally, if a beam intersects both the building and the trees, we see
a mix of the two behaviors.
In our work, we build on these observations and propose a
non-exponential transmittance model that is better suited to
represent arbitrary 3D scenes as a participating medium.
Non-exponential transmittance formulations have been explored in a few
papers in computer graphics.
Non-exponential transmittance occurs for example when rendering
granular media, such as this sandcastle made up of individually
modeled grains of sand.
A non-exponential transmittance has also been considered to expand
the appearance space of subsurface scattering.
More recently, Bitterli and colleagues as well as Jarabe and
colleagues adapted the radiative transport framework to support
non-exponential media. These papers are focused on the theory on how
to combine non-exponential media with surfaces and bidirectional
rendering algorithms. In our work, we build on these prior works to
expand non-exponential transmittance models to be better suited for
scene representation. To use participating media for volumetric scene
representation, we are interested in the heterogeneous case, where
the medium parameters are spatially varying.
For an exponential medium, the transmittance can be computed by taking
the exponential of the negative integral over extinction values.
The extinction coefficient controls how optically dense the medium
is. The inner integral can for example be evaluated using ray
marching, where the medium is sampled in regular steps.
This integral over extinction is also called the optical depth “tau”.
Starting from the exponential transmittance, we can introduce a
non-exponential transmittance by replacing the exponential function
by a more general transmittance function “f”.
The function “f” is function of the optical depth tau computed from
the medium’s extinction. In prior work this function “f” was assumed
to be fixed. So, what this gives us is a model where we can spatially
vary the medium extinction, but the transmittance behavior itself
remains fixed. In our work, we make this function “f” spatially
varying too. We do this because we observed that the transmittance
behavior in a real scene isn’t really fixed.
We need to spatially vary the transmittance behavior to be able to
support exponential and linear transmittance as well as the
combination of the two.
We propose a solution to this problem in two steps.
First, we define a parametric transmittance function “f”.
For simplicity, we chose to just interpolate between exponential and
linear behavior. The interpolation is controlled by the parameter
gamma between 0 and 1.
Plotting the transmittance for different values of gamma we can see
how we can interpolate between exponential and linear transmittance.
Intuitively, what we would like to do now is to stitch different
transmittance behaviors together.
Let’s say we initially encounter a region with linear transmittance.
Then a region with exponential transmittance, and finally again
linear transmittance.
Our goal is to combine these transmittance functions such that the
resulting function remains continuous and physically plausible.
We also would like to do that in a way that is not depending on the
underlying specific representation of the medium.
This is exactly what we do now.
We can translate this idea of stitching together transmittance
behaviors into the continuous form.
We start with the prior non-exponential transmittance formulation
where “f” was fixed. We then first expand this expression using the
fundamental theorem of calculus.
Similar expressions have actually been used for exponential
transmittances in the paper by Georgiev and colleagues.
We then apply the chain rule to simplify further and replace the inner
optical depth integral by the inverse function “f” applied to the
transmittance. This simply just uses the definition from the first
line. Finally, this then allows us to introduce the additional
parameter gamma. Gamma is now spatially varying.
Now, let’s have a look at how we can use this new transmittance model
for appearance prefiltering for level of detail.
In appearance prefiltering, we are given a known input scene and would
like to approximate it as a volume.
In the following, we will determine the parameters of our volumetric
representation by running different queries and a localized parameter
optimization using the input scene.
First, we compute a binary voxelization of the scene to find which
voxels contain geometry.
We are interested in finding a sparse voxelization, so any voxel that
does not intersect the scene’s geometry, will remain empty.
In a next step, we trace light paths in each voxel.
This allows to determine an initial set of volume parameters.
We obtain albedo, phase function parameters and a naïve extinction
estimate from this. A s a phase function, we use the SGGX phase
function proposed by Heitz and colleagues.
We initialize the transmittance to be exponential.
To determine the optimal parameters for extinction and gamma, we then
randomly sample segments in the volumetric scene representation and
evaluate the transmittance.
We evaluate the ground truth transmittance by tracing rays in a beam
in the original scene. We then compute an L_1 loss between our
transmittance and the reference and optimize the volume parameters
using gradient descent.
This kind of localized fitting approach works really well.
This is an easier optimization problem to solve than using
image-based differentiable rendering to optimize the volume
parameters. Let’s have a look at some results.
Here we compare our volumetric scene representation to the reference
rendered using the original scene.
As we zoom in, the volume resolution that we use increases.
Our method faithfully captures the appearance of the reference.
Our volumetric representation does not have any lighting information
baked in and can therefore be rendered under arbitrary illumination.
Here, we compare the result using our non-exponential model and a
more conventional exponential model.
The exponential result suffers from light leaking.
We can show the same kind of results on this city scene.
Here, the exponential model does not manage to make the roads fully
opaque. We end up with a semitransparent appearance.
Similarly, for this dragon scene, we can see the ground plane leak
through the dragon when using an exponential transmittance.
Here, both the dragon and the ground plane are represented in the
same volume. The exponential transmittance model frequently results
in light leaking. In this scene, light leaks through the red and blue
surfaces, causing the shadow on the ground plane to not appear as
dark as in the reference.
One natural question to ask here is if this is just an artifact of
the optimization routine we chose.
More precisely, we could try using a different loss.
It turns out to be not that easy.
Here, we optimized the exponential model with a relative loss, that
more strongly penalizes leaking.
This slightly improves the shadow but leads to bloating of the
silhouettes. Our model matches the reference much more closely.
We can see a similar behavior on this fence scene.
Here, the relative loss results in a bloated appearance of the
semitransparent fence.
This shows that the limitations of the exponential model cannot be
fixed by just changing the loss function.
We can also compare the result obtained using our non-exponential
prefiltering method to the prior volumetric LoD method by Loubet and
Neyret. Their Hybrid LoD method attempts to divide the scene into
volume-like and surface-like parts.
This classification problem is very difficult, and their method often
misclassifies, leading to light leaking.
Here we compare our method to theirs at different resolutions.
Our method more faithfully represents the input scene at all scales.
So far, we’ve only showed applications on scenes consisting of diffuse
surfaces. However, if we swap the diffuse version of the SGGX phase
function for its specular variant we can also model metallic
surfaces. We can reproduce the overall appearance of the reference,
but there is some blurring.
We believe that this is primarily caused by the phase function not
being expressive enough.
Improving the phase function remains an important avenue of future
work. All the results we showed so far were for appearance
prefiltering, where we assume the ground truth scene to be known.
I would like to conclude this presentation by showing a few results
for image-based reconstruction.
We use a differentiable volume renderer and optimize a volumetric
representation while accounting for direct and indirect illumination
up to 4 bounces.
We store volume parameters on a voxel grid of resolution up to 256
voxels cubed. Here we optimized the volume parameters under a uniform
illumination. We optimize both an exponential model as well as our
non-exponential model. When re-rendering under constant illumination,
both models look quite similar.
We ran these optimizations using a differentiable renderer written in
CUDA. Both optimizations took a little less than one hour to run.
Our non-exponential model takes around 10% longer to optimize than
the exponential model. Since we optimized the volume parameters
accounting for global illumination, we can re-render the resulting
volume using a different environment map.
Using an environment map with bright windows reveals that the
exponential representation is far from opaque.
Light is leaking through the leaves of the plant.
This is despite the optimization using an explicit silhouette loss.
Our non-exponential model behaves much more robustly under
relighting. As a last result, I would like to show an application of
non-exponential transmittance to neural radiance fields.
Neural radiance fields model scenes as emissive volumes, with a
neural network modeling the spatial variation in volume parameters.
In contrast to the previous results, this method does not allow for
relighting. Here, we reconstruct a simple test scene both using our
transmittance model and conventional NeRF using exponential
transmittance. The test scene consists of a single flat diffuse
plane. The non-exponential transmittance model manages to better
separate the foreground plane from the black background.
Finally, we also applied a simplified, purely linear transmittance
model to the Lego scene.
Our result and the original exponential NeRF are quite similar, but
we can see a small improvement in sharpness.
We believe a more thorough investigation of the combination of
non-exponential transmittance with neural rendering would be an
interesting direction for future work.
In conclusion, we show that volumetric scene representations can
benefit from using a non-exponential transmittance representation.
A non-exponential transmittance model more closely approximates the
ground truth behavior. Our new model allows to spatially vary the
transmittance behavior, which improves results both on level of
detail and image-based reconstruction.
For future work, we think improving the representation power of the
phase function is necessary to model more complex material
appearances. This could either be done by building on existing phase
function models or by using neural networks.
Additionally, our model is not reciprocal.
We didn’t find this to be a practical problem in the current setting
but coming up with a reciprocal formulation remains an interesting
challenge. We also evaluate our model with biased ray marching.
Evaluating it in an unbiased way remains future work.
This concludes this presentation.
Thank you for your attention!